# Tactical Theorems and Frameworks '06

## Q & A wwfan

### Mentality

- Player instructions overrule team instructions.

Inarguable. I believe team ultra-defensive and ultra-attacking mentality overrides individual mentalities, but as for all other instructions, individual overrides team.

- Main uses are to give shape, positioning and movement to team.

To an extent. I refer you to my mentality assumptions. Mentality as a risk/reward agent. It is primarily concerned with how likely a player is to make an attacking move. Thus, a DC with mentality of 6 will only make an attacking move if he judges the move as being >70% likely to succeed. An FC with a mentality of 18 will have a go even if he thinks the move has >10% chance of succeeding.

- Connects closely to formation, width and DL.

Arguable. Mentality is a formation framework, but width relates to home and away systems. D-line certainly was linked to mentality in '06 but this is less clear in '07.

- Influenced by or influences Tempo, Width and Passing Style.

Arguable. Passing style and tempo relates to each other, with direct linked to fast and short linked to slow. My passing/mentality splits were experimental but worked well for me in '06. I know of people having success breaking those rules. Width relates to home and away systems.

### Creative Freedom

Many posts on the forum are of the assumption that the creative freedom slider stops a player from obeying other individual instructions. If it is set high then a player will be more unlikely to do what he is told, if set low then he will adhere to instructions. I believe there are elements of truth to this, but it is not the whole story.

A player on high creative freedom will inevitably look for options in attack as soon as he gets the ball. If he decides that the creative/killer ball is on he will play it. Sometimes it will come off, sometimes it won't. That is the very nature of creativity in all walks of life. If he decides the creative/killer ball is unfeasible, he will play a safe ball and move into position to try again. Hence, decision making is also key to a truly great creative player. A creative player with good decision making will invariably choose the right time to play the right ball. Other factors will influence whether it comes off, such as the defensive stats of the opposition players trying to intercept the ball/tackle the creative player and the off the ball/decision making stats of the player trying to pick up the pass, but on the whole a player with good creativity/decision making will create chances. Alternatively, a player with good creativity/bad decision making will often try to play unfeasibly difficult balls that will result in interceptions and counter attacking moves more often than creating chances for his own team. When setting instructions for such a player, be aware that giving him total freedom will likely result in you losing possession and having to defend quick countering moves as often as getting into scoring positions yourself.

Creativity is not flair and must be managed accordingly. A creative player creates chances for others; a flair player creates chances for himself. Thus, whereas a flair player can be closely marked and looking out of the game, only to do something extraordinary and score out of nothing, a creative player needs time and space in which to operate, so he has more opportunity to spot the creative pass. Thus, when positioning a creative player, make sure he is loosely zonal marking with closing down set to a minimum, so that he is always in the maximum amount of space to receive a pass. If he has excellent decision making/teamwork/workrate/off the ball, he could also be assigned a free role, which would allow him to rove about the pitch looking for space and thus become more useful. Creative players are often low on bravery, so can be marked out of the game by hard-men opponents. Be aware of this if you feel your creative player is not performing, and possibly look to play him deeper which will draw his marker out of position and create space in front of him for others to exploit.

Finally, in terms of creativity for the whole team, be careful setting it too high for too many players. If you do this, too many people will be looking for the killer ball, and your truly creative players will have less opportunity to influence a game. Also, too many passes are likely to be intercepted as they are being hit from unfeasible positions on the pitch, and possession will turn over almost the second you have the ball. Tweak it high for a few players, and let the others focus on more mundane tasks, such as defending or scoring goals.

### Off the Ball

I have read a fair number of posts complaining that the FCs refuse to stay in the middle of the pitch and drift wide. The standard response to this is to reduce creative freedom to the lowest notch for the front men. This is nonsensical. Forwards drift wide to find space to get the ball. If they stay in one position all match they are too easy to mark out of the game. Forwards and attacking-minded midfielders need to be encouraged to look for space. In this respect, a high level of creative freedom alongside excellent off the ball stats will be extremely beneficial. If one FC moves wide to pick up the ball it won't matter as long as other players have the requisite creative freedom and off the ball to move into the space he has created. Higher levels of creative freedom have to be regarded as optimal for forward players in order to create space and move the defence around.

### Teamwork

A player with high teamwork attribute will religiously obey the manager's instructions, whether they are appropriate for the situation he is in or not. Teamwork is great when you have applied the optimum settings for the tactical situation your team is in, but will actually be disadvantageous if you have set inappropriate instructions. For example, if you have set closing down to 20 then a player with good teamwork will constantly close down, no matter what position/situation he finds himself in. This is where the maximum or minimum slider settings begin to fail and why moderation must be applied. If a player with high teamwork is told to close down to 20, then he will do it without fail; if he is told to close down often but not always, his decision making becomes more important, as he then has to decide on the appropriate moment to apply the closing down instruction.

A player with low teamwork is obviously more difficult to manage as you can never be sure whether he will obey instructions or not. This will be doubly difficult if he has bad decision making, as he will regularly do what he wants, no matter if it is a good decision or not. All a manager can do with this sort of player is try to ensure he is in a position that won't cause huge harm to his own team, but where his unpredictability will sometimes come off and create chances/opportunities to score.

### Decision Making

Decision making is hugely important in how you instruct a player. The higher the decision making stat, the more mixed instructions you can give him, as you are sure he will take the right option at the right time. Thus, a central defender with good defensive stats and high decision making can be asked to close down to mixed, as you can trust him to apply the instruction when required. A central defender with bad decision making should be told to close down rarely, which will keep him between the striker and the goal and thus make the attacking player try to go past him, rather than committing himself to a rash challenge. This can be applied right down the line for every position on the pitch. If a player has poor decision making, give him firm instructions to do a job; if he has good decision making, trust him to do the right thing. For a winger, for example, you could tell him to choose between through balls and crossing; with them both set to mixed, as you believe he will invariably pick the right option. I could go on and on about this, but I'm sure it is pretty obvious by now.

### Passing Style

- Relates to Formation, Tempo, Width, DL.

Yes to tempo, not sure about the others

### Tempo

- Higher means more shots and less possession, lower would thus mean less shots, more possession...

Seems to be the case

- Affects Passing and is Influenced by Passing.

Yes

- There is, I think, a huge difference between playing a normal side or a counter-attacking side?

I certainly regard them as two different modes of play and tactical plans should be made to combat either

- Taken into consideration setting this you would have to look at a players ability as well, mainly decisions etc.

Home and away are key in deciding this

### Width

- Always wide at home, to create the space to be able to tear them apart...

That's the theory

- Normal against equal or weaker sides, narrow against stronger sides playing away.

That's the theory (again!!)

### Closing Down

- Can be used in varied ways, not sure what to say here, I always apply 5x5 rule in most of my games (5 players on 15, 5 players on 5, or 16/14, 17/13, 18/2, never the other way around though...).

I suggest reading supersaint's stuff. Low d-line = high CD, high d-line = low CD. Tha's how I (roughly) played like this in '06, although until supersaint's post I didn't make the connection

### Time Wasting

- Used to be handy to get more possession.

Yes, but was disastrous against the 3-3-2-1-1

### Defensive Line

- Deep doesn't go well.

From most posts, no, but apply supersaint's theory in testing

- Neither does Push Up.

From most posts, no, but apply supersaint's theory in testing

Thus leaving it in the middle makes most sense to me, meaning no matter you're playing stronger or weaker sides, are better playing or outplayed, and counter or get countered, it's always just right.

- Not necessarily

Leaving it deep gives opposition more possession, while moving it up means you'll have less space, thus less options, thus less possession.

- Only if they are attacking, not if they are playing defensively

Moving it up can get them to counter easier, then you can Offside Trap them, which doesn't really work, it seems.

- I would argue against using a high d-line against teams that sit back. I think d-line settings are vital. There needs to be a lot of thought put into how they work for '07. Supersaint's theory seems to be the best on offer at the moment. Deep = high CD (mirrored d-line + CD = 20). High = low CD (mirrored d-line + CD = 20). Further testing and thought gratefully received.

- And I also came up with a theorie about Home and Away tactics, how about they mirror each other, mostly...anyone tried this or has any thoughts on this?

Pretty much how I envision it and concurrent with my theories

### Basic Home & Away Settings

Home: Low d-line & high CD defenders. Lots of CF and low CD up front. Wide and low time-wasting. Farrows.

Away: High d-line and low CD defenders. High CF & CD up front. Narrow and highish time wasting. Counter-attack. No farrows. Sarrowed FCs to work the flanks.
